= Rodish

Rodish parses an argv array using a routing tree approach. It is
designed to make it easy to implement command line applications
that support multiple levels of subcommands, with options at each
level.

= Installation

  gem install rodish

= Source Code

Source code is available on GitHub at https://github.com/jeremyevans/rodish

= Simple Example

Here's a simple commented example with a single subcommand:

  require "rodish"

  # This just creates a normal Ruby class.  For each argv parse, Rodish will
  # create an instance of this class
  class CliExample

    # This allows instances of the class to be instantiated with or without
    # a default person.
    def initialize(default_person=nil)
      @default_person = default_person
    end

    # This installs the Rodish processor into CliExample. It extends the
    # CliExample class with the Rodish::Processor module.
    Rodish.processor(self)

    # Without arguments, the on method configures the root command for
    # the processor.
    on do

      # Provide description for root command
      desc "Example Hello World CLI"

      # This method call creates a hello subcommand of the current/root command.
      on "hello" do

        # Provide description for this subcommand
        desc "Says hello to person or world"

        # This adds a usage string and a -p options for the hello subcommand.
        # The block passed is used to set the options via the optparse library.
        options("cli-example hello [options]") do
          on("-p", "--person=name", "say hello to a specific person")
        end

        # If the given argv is for the hello subcommand, this block will be
        # executed in the context of the CliExample instance.
        run do |opts|
          "Hello #{opts[:person] || @default_person || 'World'}"
        end
      end
    end
  end

  # This requests Rodish to process the provided argv.  Rodish will determine
  # the related command block to execute and execute it.  The return value of
  # that block will be returned to the caller.
  CliExample.process(["hello"])
  # => "Hello World"

  # Additional arguments passed to .process are passed to .new.  In this
  # example, this sets the default person.
  CliExample.process(["hello"], "Adol")
  # => "Hello Adol"

  # This shows an example of passing an option to a subcommand, and using
  # the option value when returning a response.
  CliExample.process(["hello", "-p", "Feena"], "Adol")
  # => "Hello Feena"

= Rodish DSL

Inside the <tt>Rodish.processor</tt> block, you are in the context of the root
command. The following methods are available for configuring the processing of
the command.

== +on+

The +on+ method adds a subcommand of the current command, and yields to the
block to configure the subcommand.  All of the methods described in the Rodish
DSL section can be executed inside the +on+ block, and arbitrary levels of
subcommands are supported.

== +desc+

Provides a description for the command.  This description will show up in the
help output for the command.

== +options+

The +options+ method sets up an options parser for the current command.  The
default options parser disallows any options. Options are parsed into a hash,
which is yielded to commands (as in the above example).

This method requires a String argument for the usage for the current command.
You can also provide a +key+ keyword argument, to put parsed options into
a subhash of the main options hash, which can be useful when options are
parsed at multiple levels.

A block must be provided, which is executed in the context of a Rodish::OptionParser
instance.  Rodish::OptionParser is a subclass of Ruby's standard OptionParser
(from +optparse+), with a few additional methods.

== +banner+

Set the usage banner for the command, without allowing options for the command.

== +args+

The +args+ method sets the number of arguments accepted when running the command.
The default for +args+ is +0+. You can provide either an Integer to accept a
fixed number of arguments, or a Range to allow any number of arguments in that
range.

== +run+

The +run+ method sets the block to run for the current command.  If the
command accepts a fixed number of arguments, those arguments are yielded
as the first arguments to the command.  If the command accepts a range of
argument numbers, then the remaining argv array will be passed as the
first argument.

The block will be passed two additional arguments, the options already
parsed, and the current Rodish::Command object.

== +is+

The +is+ method is a shortcut for calling the +on+ method and +run+ method.
For example:

  is "hello" do
    :world
  end
  
is equivalent to:

  on "hello" do
    run do
      :world
    end
  end

The +is+ method also takes +args+ keyword arguments to specify the number
of arguments.

== +autoload_subcommand_dir+

The +autoload_subcommand_dir+ takes a directory, and will autoload
subcommands from the given directory.  Filenames ending in +.rb+ in
this directory will be treated as subcommands, and requiring the
file should add the appropriate subcommand.

This allows you to design complex command line programs where only
the parts of the program needed to handle the given argv are loaded.

= Object Model

Rodish has four main classes/modules:

Processor :: This is the module that extends the class you load Rodish into.
             It contains a reference to the root command for the processor.
Command :: Handles processing the argv.  Contains references to subcommands,
           similar to a tree.
DSL :: Used for configuring the Command instances.
OptionParser :: A subclass of Ruby's standard OptionParser, used for parsing
                options for commands.

Each Rodish processor has a separate subclass of Command, DSL, and OptionParser.

= Plugins

After installing Rodish into a processor, the plugin method can be used to load
plugins into the processor. Plugins can change how the processor and related
command, DSL, and option parsers work.  Each plugin is a module that can contain
one or more of the following submodules:

* ProcessMethods :: Extends the processor with additional methods
* CommandMethods :: Module that is included in the Command subclass for the processor.
* DSLMethods :: Module that is included in the DSL subclass for the processor.
* OptionParserMethods :: Module that is included in the OptionParser subclass for the processor.

Plugins can also implement singleton +before_load+ and/or +after_load+ methods,
which are called before or after loading the plugin modules, respectively.

When loading plugins, you can pass the module instance directly:

  class App
    Rodish.processor(self)
    plugin PluginModule
  end

However, the typical usage is passing a symbol for the plugin:

  class App
    Rodish.processor(self)
    plugin :plugin_name
  end

If the plugin has not already been registered, Rodish will require the
+rodish/plugins/plugin_name+ file, which should register the plugin.
See plugins that ship with Rodish for an example of how to create a plugin.

The following plugins ship with Rodish:

cache_help_output :: Cache help output when freezing command.
help_examples :: Allow including example help output with command usage.
help_option_values :: Allow showing allowed option values for help options.
help_order :: Support overriding order of command help sections.
invalid_args_message: Support overriding the message shown when an invalid number of arguments
                      is provided.
post_commands :: Adds support for subcommands that appear after arguments (see below).
skip_option_parsing :: Allows for skipping option parsing, treating all elements of argv
                       as arguments.
usages :: Get a hash with help output for all commands/subcommands for the processor.
wrap_options_separator :: Add wrap method to options parser, for wrapping long separator lines

= Post Commands

The post_commands plugin adds support for commands that appear after arguments.
It adds the following configuration methods:

== +run_on+

The +run_on+ method is similar to +on+, except it creates a post subcommand
instead of a normal subcommand.  Post subcommands allow the +run+ block
to parse part of the remaining argv array, and then call a subcommand with
the modified (or a new) argv array.  You dispatch to post subcommands
inside the +run+ block by calling +run+ on the command argument:

  on "hello" do
    args(2...)

    run do |argv, opts, command|
      @name = argv.shift
      command.run(self, opts, argv)
    end

    run_on "world" do
      run do
        "Hello #{@name.upcase} World!"
      end
    end
  end

  # process(%w[hello foo world])
  # => "Hello FOO World!"

== +run_is+

The +run_is+ method operates similarly to +is+, but adds a post subcommand
instead of a normal subcommand.

== +post_options+

The +post_options+ method sets an option parser that is used for post
subcommands. This parses options from the argv array that passed to
+command.run+, before calling the related subcommand. Example:

  on "hello" do
    args(2...)

    post_options("Usage: hello name [options] subcommand ...") do
      on("-c", "--cap", "capitalize instead of uppercase")
    end

    run do |argv, opts, command|
      @name = argv.shift
      command.run(self, opts, argv)
    end

    run_is "world" do |opts|
      name = opts[:cap] ? @name.capitalize :  @name.upcase
      "Hello #{name} World!"
    end
  end

  # process(%w[hello foo world])
  # => "Hello FOO World!"
  # process(%w[hello foo -c world])
  # => "Hello Foo World!"

== +post_banner+

Set the usage banner for using post subcommands with the command,
without allowing post options for the command.

== +autoload_post_subcommand_dir+

The +autoload_post_subcommand_dir+ operates the same as
+autoload_subcommand_dir+, but it handles post subcommands instead of
normal subcommands.

= Examples

The tests that ship with Rodish fully cover all of Rodish's functionality.

If you would like to view a production example using Rodish, which
uses most of Rodish's features, please see UbiCli, which is part of
Ubicloud:

* Main class: https://github.com/ubicloud/ubicloud/blob/main/lib/ubi_cli.rb
* Commands (separate command per file): https://github.com/ubicloud/ubicloud/tree/main/cli-commands

= History

Rodish was extracted from Ubicloud (https://github.com/ubicloud/ubicloud),
and is the argv processor used in Ubicloud's command line interface.

= Naming

The name Rodish was chosen because Rodish uses an API similar (-ish) to the Roda
web framework (http://roda.jeremyevans.net), and the library is designed for
use in applications executed from a shell (sh).

= License

MIT

= Author

Jeremy Evans <code@jeremyevans.net>
